And right now, ladies and gentlemen, with the next topic,
Adventures with the Event Loop by Erin Zimmer,
Senior Engineer and Thought Leader from Shine Solutions Australia!
Hi.
For some reason, I insist on using weird versions of OSes
when I'm going to give talks in strange places.
I don't.
All right, so today we're going to talk about the event loop,
which is a pretty important part of how JavaScript works.
No.
Maybe we're just going to look at this picture of a dinosaur.
That's fun, too.
The screen's not in focus,
so the clicker's not receiving the clicks.
Just this one?
All right.
I'm going to stand behind the lectern and do this.
It's going to be fun.
All right.
My name is Erin Zimmer.
I work for a consulting company in Melbourne called Shine Solutions.
I am both a Mozilla Tech Speaker and a Google Developer Expert.
And I'm available on Twitter if you would like to talk about
the event loop or things going wrong in tech or anything like that.
And if you'd like to play along at home,
these slides are available at event-loop.ez.codes.
I will warn you though,
I built all the demos using web components with HTML imports,
which seemed like a good idea at the time,
and isn't supported in any browser except for Chrome
up to the current one.
Cool.
So, what even is the event loop?
So, the event loop is basically the part of the browser
that controls when your JavaScript runs.
So, if we have a page that's being loaded over the web,
this one is actually Twitter.
When the browser receives the HTML,
it's going to parse the HTML
and it's going to build the Document Object Model.
It's going to parse all the styles
and build the CSS Object Model.
And whenever it runs into a script tag,
whether it's an inline script or an external script,
it's going to stop what it's doing and immediately run that script.
None of that has anything to do with the event loop.
And if that was the only JavaScript that we ever ran on a page,
this talk would be very short.
But as it turns out,
most of the JavaScript that we write in that initial stage
is actually setting up JavaScript that we're going to run later.
So, it could be stuff like a timer,
which is going to just run a bit of JavaScript in the future.
It could be an event listener,
which is going to wait for the user to perform
some kind of interaction with the page
and then run some JavaScript.
Or it could be something like a network request
where we're going to use fetch or XHR
and fetch some resource over the network
and then run a callback in response to that.
So, the event loop controls when these things get executed.
So, this is what it looks like basically.
We have these, oh no, I can't see my cursor.
All right.
We have these inputs.
So, we have like user interactions, we have timers,
and we have network requests.
Each of these things is going to run
and then once the timer comes back or the network request returns,
then the browser is going to find the related callback
and it's going to put it in this queue.
And the event loop is going to control how this queue is run.
At its simplest,
The event loop looks something like this.
So, if we were to write it in pseudocode,
it's just a while loop that runs forever.
Each turn of the loop,
it's going to grab the first task off the task queue
and then it's going to run that task.
If we looked at it with our example from before,
we can have some events running,
they're going to go in the queue,
and the event loop is just going to run them all in order.
Cool.
Does that make sense to everybody?
Yep.
Good.
Because it turns out it's a little bit more complicated than that.
So the event loop runs in conjunction with the
rendering pipeline.
The rendering pipeline is responsible for displaying
what you see on the screen.
So it's going to take that DOM, it's going to take
the CSSOM, it's going to build a render tree.
It's going to turn that into a bitmap and display it
on the screen.
The rendering pipeline likes to run once every time
the screen refreshes.
So if you've got a 60 hertz monitor, that means it's
going to run 60 times a second.
So once every 16 milliseconds.
Our event loop works with our rendering pipeline
like this.
The way that it works is that we can have events
added to the queue.
And then the event loop is going to run through those
events, one at a time until it's time to render,
when the 16 milliseconds is up, and then it's going
to go over and do a render.
Right, so it's going to run task, task, task and
then run a render.
The important thing though is that when you're
running a task from the task queue,
that task is always going to run start to finish.
There's no interruption.
You're guaranteed that if you have a JavaScript task,
it will finish completion before anything else happens.
So that means if we're in the middle of a task and
the rendering pipeline wants to run,
the rendering pipeline has to wait.
So if you're writing JavaScript, it's a good idea to
not have extremely long running tasks.
If you've got stuff that runs for more than 16
milliseconds,
your browser's going to start dropping frames and
your animations are going to look a bit janky.
So if you do have long running tasks, either split
them into smaller tasks,
or you can use something like a web worker to move
the processing off the main thread.
Okay. So now our event loop looks something like this.
It's an infinite loop.
For every turn of the loop, we're going to take a
task off the task queue and run that task.
Then if it's time to repaint, we're going to repaint.
Everyone's cool with that?
Good. Because it turns out, it's a little bit more
complicated than that.
See, an event loop can have one or more task queues.
This is just like the text out of the spec.
And when I was preparing the talk, I thought what
I'll do is
I'll go and find some code in a browser, like an
open source browser,
and I'll look at the code and I'll find a browser
that has one or more task queues
and I'll show you an example of a real world browser
that has one or more task queues.
The thing is though, browsers are written in C++.
And I'm a front-end developer.
And as far as I can tell, C++ is mostly just
punctuation and the word delegate.
And I don't really know what's going on.
So instead, we're going to have a theoretical browser
with multiple task queues.
This one is actually the example from the spec.
So I didn't just make it up, somebody else did.
Okay. So in this browser, we have two queues.
One queue for user actions and one queue for
everything else.
So if we have our user actions, they're going to go
in one queue.
And our timer and Wi-Fi actions will go in the other
queue when they get there.
This browser prioritizes user interactions.
So as long as there's anything in the user
interaction queue,
it's going to run that before it runs anything in
the other queue.
And then the rendering pipeline just works the same
as normal.
All right.
It's not a complete free-for-all with these multiple
queues though.
There are a few rules.
The queues can be executed in any order, so you can
pick that yourself.
Tasks in the same queue must be executed in the order
they arrived.
So that just means that the queues are queues.
And finally, tasks from the same source have to go in
the same queue.
So in our case, all of the user interactions went in
If you're familiar with Node.js, it uses a model like
this, and all of the timer events go in one queue,
all of the network events go in another queue.
So now, our event loop looks like this.
It's an infinite loop.
For every turn of the loop, we're going to pick a
queue.
Then we're going to take the first task off that
And we're going to run that task.
Then, if it's time to repaint, we'll repaint.
So is everybody good with that?
Cool.
Because it turns out, it's a little bit more
complicated than that.
We also have something called microtasks.
Now a microtask is a task that happens between tasks,
which is a bit confusing.
They're originally created for dealing with mutation
observers.
So a mutation observer is an event that gets fired
when a particular bit of DOM changes.
So if something gets added to it or removed or
shuffled around, whatever, you get this event fired.
The thing with these events though is that when the
DOM changes, you often want to do something else
that's also going to change the DOM.
So that means that you don't want the rendering
pipeline to run in the middle, else your users are
going to see that like halfway state between the two
things.
So microtasks give us a way to ensure that our
callback is going to run before the rendering
pipeline runs again.
Mutation observers don't get used that much.
Something that you might be more familiar with though
is promises.
So all promise callbacks are microtasks.
If you happen to really like microtasks, you can
also just create them.
Just ðš ðš’ðš—ðšðš˜ðš .ðššðšžðšŽðšžðšŽð™¼ðš’ðšŒðš›ðš˜ðšðšŠðšœðš” will give you a
microtask.
So what does that look like?
So we have here our two queues from before and our
microtask queue just on the beside the rendering
pipeline there.
And we have our inputs across the top, the ones we
had from before, plus the microtask queue.
So say our user runs some tasks, sets some timers,
whatever.
And one of these callbacks creates a promise.
And that's going to go in the microtask queue.
Now as soon as any task finishes running, the
microtask queue is going to run.
Even if the rendering pipeline wanted to run, it has
to wait until the microtask queue runs.
If the microtask queue creates more microtasks, then
all of those are going to run as well.
So as you can imagine, you can really stuff up the
rendering if you have microtasks that generate
microtasks.
So if your promise callbacks have really long
callbacks that do a bunch of stuff and run for a
really long time, it's really going to bugger up
your rendering.
So be careful with that.
Okay.
So now our event loop looks like this.
It's an infinite loop.
For each turn of the loop, we're going to pick a
queue.
Then for each queue, we're going to take the first
task off the queue, and we're going to run that
task.
Then as long as there are tasks in the microtask
queue, we're going to run all of those.
Then once all of the microtasks are done, then if
it's time to repaint, we'll repaint.
Everybody cool with that?
Cool.
Because it turns out it's a little bit more
complicated than that.
We also have the animation frame callback queue.
Now you can add something to the animation frame
callback queue by calling ðš›ðšŽðššðšžðšŽðšœðšð™°ðš—ðš’ðš–ðšŠðšðš’ðš˜ðš—ð™µðš›ðšŠðš–ðšŽ.
Why would you want to do that?
Well, you're probably not surprised to learn that
it's to do with animating things.
So imagine you have a box, and you want to animate
it so that it moves across the screen in a sine kind
of movement.
If we were to code that naively, we might write
something like this.
So it's a loop that's going to run as long as the
right side of the box hasn't reached the right side
of the screen.
For each turn of the loop, we're going to calculate
how much time has passed since the animation began.
And then we're going to pass that into some
functions that are going to calculate the new x and y
position of the box, and then set the box left and
top to those new positions.
If you do this, what you get is this.
The box just appears at the right-hand side of the
screen.
Doesn't animate at all.
The reason for that is that we've basically done
this.
We've created this massive long task that's going to
keep looping through that loop over and over again
until it's calculated that the box is at the end of
the screen, and then it's going to render.
And because we haven't let it render at any of the
points in between, we just see the box at the end.
So what we can do instead is use a recursive
function and use ðšœðšŽðšðšƒðš’ðš–ðšŽðš˜ðšžðš.
So we're just doing the same thing here, calculating
the time, getting the box x and y position.
And then if the box hasn't reached the edge of the
screen, we're going to call ðšœðšŽðšðšƒðš’ðš–ðšŽðš˜ðšžðš, which
creates a new task, which will be added to the
queue, and then that's going to move the box.
Cool.
So that looks like this.
We're going to create a task, which creates a new task,
which creates a new task, which creates a new task,
which creates a new task, and then the rendering
pipeline runs.
So that's going to happen every 16 milliseconds,
and our box is going to get animated across the screen,
and everything is going to be delightful.
Except for two small things.
First of all, in our application,
there's nothing else running.
So we know that our new animation task is going to be
the first thing on the queue each time.
It's going to be okay.
In the real world, a bunch of other stuff could be
running, which could mean that the animation task
isn't going to run in every single frame,
which is going to look a bit crap.
The other thing is that we're running those tasks
over and over again, but we're only really using
the one that runs immediately before the rendering
pipeline, right?
So we're wasting a lot of processing power.
I mean, this particular example doesn't waste that
much processing power, but in theory.
So what we can do instead is instead of calling
ðšœðšŽðšðšƒðš’ðš–ðšŽðš˜ðšžðš, we can call ðš›ðšŽðššðšžðšŽðšœðšð™°ðš—ðš’ðš–ðšŠðšðš’ðš˜ðš—ð™µðš›ðšŠðš–ðšŽ.
Which also creates a new kind of task,
but it does it in a special way.
So the ðš›ðšŽðššðšžðšŽðšœðšð™°ðš—ðš’ðš–ðšŠðšðš’ðš˜ðš—ð™µðš›ðšŠðš–ðšŽ queue is there at
the bottom in green.
And now if we run some tasks which creates an
animation task, what will happen is that task will
sit in that queue, and it won't run until the
rendering pipeline is ready to run.
And then the animation frame task will run,
and then the rendering pipeline will run.
So that queue is always going to run just immediately
before the rendering pipeline.
The other nice thing is that unlike Promises,
if we add an animation queue, an animation task,
if we run an animation task, and we add another
animation task while that one's running,
that one won't run until the next turn of
the event loop.
So that means that we can create an animation,
like one frame of an animation, and then set up
the callback for the next frame, but it won't run
until the next time the pipeline runs.
So that results in an animation like this.
So the top box is running ðš›ðšŽðššðšžðšŽðšœðšð™°ðš—ðš’ðš–ðšŠðšðš’ðš˜ðš—ð™µðš›ðšŠðš–ðšŽ,
the bottom one is running ðšœðšŽðšðšƒðš’ðš–ðšŽðš˜ðšžðš.
As you can see, they look pretty identical because
nothing else is running on the screen.
Importantly though, when we get to the end,
the top one has run 800 times, and the bottom one
has run 2,500 times.
So we've wasted four-fifths of our computing power,
three-fifths of our computing power just on doing
nothing.
Can you use ðš›ðšŽðššðšžðšŽðšœðšð™°ðš—ðš’ðš–ðšŠðšðš’ðš˜ðš—ð™µðš›ðšŠðš–ðšŽ?
Absolutely yes.
It is available in all browsers back to IE10.
It's not supported in Opera Mini, but neither is
animating things in general, so that shouldn't be
a problem.
So what does our event loop look like now?
It's still an infinite loop.
For each turn of the loop, we're going to pick
a queue.
And then we're going to take the first task off
that queue, and we're going to run that task.
Then, as long as there are tasks in the microtask
queue, we're going to run all of the microtasks.
Then, if it's time to repaint, we're going to grab
the tasks that are currently in the animation queue,
and we're going to run just those tasks.
And then we'll repaint.
Cool.
So is everybody okay with that?
Good, because that is actually as complicated as
it gets.
That's the whole event loop in the browser.
All right.
So what did we learn?
First of all, JavaScript can block rendering.
So if you have long-running tasks, you need to
either split them into smaller tasks or move them
off the main thread so that it doesn't stuff up
your user experience.
Promises operate via a special kind of task called
a microtask.
And microtasks have even more power to block
rendering than your standard JavaScript tasks.
ðš›ðšŽðššðšžðšŽðšœðšð™°ðš—ðš’ðš–ðšŠðšðš’ðš˜ðš—ð™µðš›ðšŠðš–ðšŽ is a special kind of task
that only runs with the rendering pipeline.
And it's really good for creating really nice,
smooth animations that you're guaranteed to run
every frame.
It's also good if you're doing a lot of DOM
manipulation.
It allows you to batch that all up just into one
task just before the rendering runs, which can give
you some efficiencies.
The other thing that we hopefully understand now is
why doing this sometimes fixes things.
Maybe we don't.
Cool.
And that's it.
That's all I've got.
Thank you very much.
You can grab the slides and talk me afterwards.
Thank you.
Thank you very much, Erin, for sharing your very
insightful and your experience with us for the event loop.